
---
title: HTML Living Standard
date: "2023-04-08T00:40:00"
template: "post"
draft: false
slug: "html-ls"
category: "Blog"
tags:
  - "Web"
description: "HTML Living Standard and the retirement of W3C HTML specifications."
---

<br>

HTML has been around since the early days of the World Wide Web and has gone through several iterations and revisions over the years. Two of the most significant developments in the history of HTML are 
* the creation of the HTML5 standard; and 
* the establishment of the WHATWG (Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group).

The HTML5 standard introduced many new features and capabilities to HTML, while WHATWG continues to develop the HTML Living Standard today, which is the primary living document for HTML development.

## The History of HTML
HTML was first introduced in the early 1990s as a way to create and format text-based documents for the web. It was a simple language that could be easily understood and used by anyone with a basic understanding of coding.

Over time, HTML became more complex as new features and capabilities were added to the language. This led to the creation of various versions and revisions of the HTML standard by the W3C (World Wide Web Consortium). HTML2 was the second version of HTML and was released by the W3C in 1995. HTML3 was the third version of HTML and was released by the W3C in 1996. HTML4 was the fourth version of HTML and was released by the W3C in 1997. XHTML was introduced as an evolution of HTML4 and was released by the W3C in 2000. Each new version of HTML introduced new features and capabilities, but on the other hand, also created compatibility issues with older versions of the language.

In the mid-2000s, a group of web developers and browser vendors came together to form the WHATWG. The goal of the group was to create a living document that could evolve over time and provide a single, unified standard for web developers to follow. This document became known as the HTML Living Standard. The HTML Living Standard allows web developers to stay up to date with the latest developments in the language and ensure that their code is compatible with all modern browsers and devices.


## HTML5 == HTML Living Standard ?

Short answer: No. 

HTML5 rolled out in October 2014. Since then, it has become widely adopted by web developers and browsers, and has replaced HTML4 and XHTML as the standard for web development. However in 2021, [W3C recommendation of HTML5 was retired](https://www.w3.org/standards/history/html53), along with other W3C HTML specifications, in favour of the HTML Living Standard.

This decision was based on the recognition that the HTML Living Standard is the most comprehensive and up-to-date specification for HTML development, and that there is no longer a need for a separate versioned specification from the W3C.

Today, these terms are sometimes seen used interchangeably. However in strict technical terms, HTML5 is still a static "snapshot" of specification while the HTML Living Standard is constantly evolving and updated on a regular basis.


## Final Notes

To recap, the current HTML specification is the HTML Living Standard. It is maintained by WHATWG, a community driven organizations including members from major browser vendors such as Apple, Google, Mozilla, and Microsoft. 

Learn more about the HTML Living Standard in this Github repo: https://github.com/whatwg/html

